rfc: versioned kv (#44)
tikv/rfcs: text/2020-03-11-versioned-kv.md

  - Support multi-versioned data. The corresponding application scenarios include: 
    - Data version retrieval. For certain businesses, multiple versions of historical data must be maintained for for backtracking and analysis. Reliance on third-party storage and consumption of computing resources (user dynamic characteristics, User behavior link tracking) needs to be reduced, and the data processing process optimized;
    - Data version control, for fast data recovery after problematic data writes in businesses.

  - Support data expiration based on TTL. The corresponding application scenarios include:
    - Setting expiration time to obtain data of a recent period
    - Setting expiration time to clear inactive data for a specified amount of time

### Compatibility

The design adds a new Column Family called `VerCF` in RocksDB, which avoids poential compatibility issues with the existing RawKV annd TxnKV data and processing logics, and could be created dynamically when needed. This design allows maximum reuse of the current implementations of TiKV and PD.

### Data model and interface

> VerKV is a kv-like interface similar to the RawKV interface. It hides version information from upper-layer services. Its data model is multi-versioned KV between RawKV and TxnKV. 

Reviewer: Could you specify the consistency of verkv? It's very important to backup and CDC service.

Author: Good point, I have add something about data consistency.

#### Data model

> The data model is like `key:version -> value`. The version uses the current timestamp by default, or can be specified by the user (such as the global `ts` obtained from the PD TSO). And the implementation is subject to further change if we use the user TS feature of RocksDB.

Reviewer: I suggest keeping only one time-source, PD. Different time-sources may require different implementation of the CDC, it could be difficult.

Author: for strong consistency, it is good to use pd tso. For weak consistency, is it possible for cdc to handle it flexibly?

Reviewer: > For weak consistency, is it possible for cdc to handle it flexibly?

It depends on whether we accept data loss/duplication on CDC service. With weak time-source, it could be difficult or impossible to prevent data loss/duplication.

The behavior of backup and CDC could be undefined if we allow using different time sources.

The timestamp stored in user_key is its inversion result. The purpose is to arrange the newer data (that is, the data with larger timestamp) in front of the older data (that is, data with smaller timestamp). This feature can be utilized in performance optimizing for the data scan process.

#### Data distribution

To facilitate the acquisition and efficient management of multiple versions of a key, the split point of the region will not use the timestamp of the key, so that multiple versions of the key can be guaranteed to be in the same region and the same CF. Considering the size of the region, MaxVerNum will be restrained.

The process of data balancing, scaling, and migration are the same as that of RawKV. In the process of scanning all versions of a key, if the maximum number of versions is exceeded, the redundant versions will be discarded.

#### RPC Interface

With reference to the proto interface, the following interfaces are defined as a new service other than tikv:

>   - Get/BatchGet - Gets the values for latest version of the key by default 

Reviewer: Can we just keep Get only, and support batch by default?

Author: add `batchget` is just to be consistent with `rawkv` ~

Reviewer: It feels redundant though. I prefer just keep Get, it makes the RPC interface clearer. What do you think @siddontang @zhangjinpeng1987 @BusyJay ?

## Summary

This proposal presents another KV interface - Versioned KV (VerKV), a multi-versioned KV between RawKV and TxnKV.

## Motivation

At present, Yidian Zixun adopts TiKV RawKV for Key-Value storage. Due to performance concerns, TxnKV is not used. However, RawKV only provides simple KV semantics, and does not support multiple versions based on timestamp, which causes some problems: 
  - When services are migrated from HBase to TiKV, RawKV does not fulfil some major functionality requirements such as data expiration and historical data version;
  - When developing backup and synchronization functions based on RawKV, it is difficult to solve the problems of online data migration, incremental backup, and data synchronization between two data centers because timestamp is not supported.

In order to solve the above problems, this proposal presents another kv interface - VerKV, which mainly adds version information such as timestamp to the key. At the same time, this interface will be designed to be approximate to the semantics of HBase, which will facilitate the service migration from HBase to TiKV, thereby integrating TiKV better into the HBase ecosystem.

## Detailed designs

> ### Functions and scenarios

Reviewer 2: Do we need to support multiple cfs or just one cf

Reviewer 2: RawKV supports get/put with cf, but restrict the scope with [defaut, write, lock]. Maybe VerKV should not support multiple cfs, and only operate on its dedicated cf?  /cc @zhangjinpeng1987 @BusyJay

Reviewer 3: I thought raw kv lets you write to any CF?

Author: To be consist with RawKV，here just write one cf "verkv".

Here are the functionality designs and the corresponding application scenarios for VerKV:
   - Support data migration, incremental backup, CDC (Change Data Capture) and cross-IDC cluster synchronization application scenarios include:
     - Online data replication between TiKV clusters, which include a full migrations followed by incremental migrations;
     - Cluster data backup, which includes a first full backup followed  perform an incremental data backups every other time;
     - CDC service created based on incremental data acquisition; can reliably provide incremental data services;
     - In cross data center cluster synchronization scenarios, VerKV can not only process  incremental data synchronization, but also handle write conflicts caused by the same key.

  - Support multi-versioned data. The corresponding application scenarios include: 

>     - Data version retrieval. For certain businesses, multiple versions of historical data must be maintained for for backtracking and analysis. Reliance on third-party storage and consumption of computing resources (user dynamic characteristics , User behavior link tracking) needs to be reduced, and the data processing process optimized;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Data version retrieval. For certain businesses, multiple versions of historical data must be maintained for for backtracking and analysis. Reliance on third-party storage and consumption of computing resources (user dynamic characteristics, User behavior link tracking) needs to be reduced, and the data processing process optimized;
```

    - Data version control, for fast data recovery after problematic data writes in businesses.

>   - Support data expiration based on TTL. The corresponding application scenarios include:

Reviewer 3: Why does this need to be implemented in TiKV rather than by the client?

Reviewer 2: I have the same question

Author: Yes, it could be implement in the client sdk, but implemented in tikv would be better for less data communicate between tikv and client.

    - Setting expiration time to obtain data of a recent period
    - Setting expiration time to clear inactive data for a specified amount of time

### Compatibility

> The design adds a VerKV Column Family in RocksDB, which avoids poential compatibility issues with the existing RawKV annd TxnKV data and processing logics, and could be created dynamically when needed. This design allows maximum reuse of the current implementations of TiKV and PD.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The design adds a new Column Family called `VerCF` in RocksDB, which avoids poential compatibility issues with the existing RawKV annd TxnKV data and processing logics, and could be created dynamically when needed. This design allows maximum reuse of the current implementations of TiKV and PD.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about the name, better to decide it now?

> 

Reviewer 3: We already have some problem with mixing raw and transactional APIs (as described in the motivation). It seems to me that there is potential to make this worse by adding a third API. As part of this RFC I would like to see some mechanism for better enforcing separation of API use.

Author: the problem with mixing raw and transactional APIs is for those two apis use the same `default` cf. so here verkv api use a separated cf. later, it is possible for rawkv to use other cf, then it is ok to use those three apis simultaneously.

Reviewer 3: aiui, that is not the only problem - using the raw API it is possible to edit any CF, which can mean circumventing or just breaking the transactional API. So it is only ok to use both APIs if you don't access any of the three CFs used for transactions with the raw API. There is also back-compat hazard (e.g., if a user has a CF called VerKV already).

As a mechanism for separating APIs, I think separating CFs is fine, I guess we would need some kind of opt-in for users who deliberately want to access VerKV/default/write/lock CFs

### Data model and interface

> VerKV is a kv-like interface similar to the RawKV interface. It hides version information from upper-layer services. Its data model is multi-versioned KV between RawKV and TxnKV. 

Reviewer 3: Are there VerKV transactions? (Sorry for a such a beginner question - I'm not familiar with HBase)

Author: For now,  have not considered transactions, later maybe have it.

#### Data model

> The data model is like `key:version -> value`. The version uses the current timestamp by default, or can be specified by the user (such as the global `ts` obtained from the PD TSO). And the implementation is subject to further change if we use the user TS feature of RocksDB.

Reviewer 2: To support TTL in TinyKV, I think we should determine the format of the timestamp, maybe just use the PD TSO.

> The data model is like `key:version -> value`. The version uses the current timestamp by default, or can be specified by the user (such as the global `ts` obtained from the PD TSO). And the implementation is subject to further change if we use the user TS feature of RocksDB.

Author: the time of the request

> The maximum number of versions in the cluster can be configured via `MaxVerNum`. The default value is 1. Redundant versions are removed during version recycling (compaction or garbage collection).

Reviewer 3: Is there such a limit for the transactional API?

Reviewer: No, but txn API has a time-based limitation (GC lifetime, default 10min).

The timestamp stored in user_key is its inversion result. The purpose is to arrange the newer data (that is, the data with larger timestamp) in front of the older data (that is, data with smaller timestamp). This feature can be utilized in performance optimizing for the data scan process.

#### Data distribution

To facilitate the acquisition and efficient management of multiple versions of a key, the split point of the region will not use the timestamp of the key, so that multiple versions of the key can be guaranteed to be in the same region and the same CF. Considering the size of the region, MaxVerNum will be restrained.

The process of data balancing, scaling, and migration are the same as that of RawKV. In the process of scanning all versions of a key, if the maximum number of versions is exceeded, the redundant versions will be discarded.

#### RPC Interface

With reference to the proto interface, the following interfaces are defined as a new service other than tikv:

>   - Get/BatchGet -  Gets the values for latest version of the key by default 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Get/BatchGet - Gets the values for latest version of the key by default 
```

>   - GetNum/BatchGetNum - Get the values for a specified number of versions of a key. `version_num` must be less than or equal to `MaxVerNum`. 

Reviewer 3: "must be less than or equal to `MaxVerNum`. " Why? Seems that we don't need this restriction

>   - GetNum/BatchGetNum - Get the values for a specified number of versions of a key. `version_num` must be less than or equal to `MaxVerNum`. 

Author: yes, it would be option. Here I refer to the api of HBase.

>   - GetNum/BatchGetNum - Get the values for a specified number of versions of a key. `version_num` must be less than or equal to `MaxVerNum`. 

Author: > "must be less than or equal to `MaxVerNum`. " Why? Seems that we don't need this restriction

General, it is needed to restrict the num of value versions, it would help save space, and be good for performance.

>   - GetNum/BatchGetNum - Get the values for a specified number of versions of a key. `version_num` must be less than or equal to `MaxVerNum`. 

Reviewer 3: But if version_num is > MaxVerNum, then TiKV should still only return MaxVerNum number of entries because there shouldn't be more than that in the DB (if there are, then it seems the client may want to know those extra entries too)

>   - GetNum/BatchGetNum - Get the values for a specified number of versions of a key. `version_num` must be less than or equal to `MaxVerNum`. 

Author: Yes, client can only know `MaxVerNum` number of entries at most. In most situations, this semantic is okay.

>   - GetNumWithSV/BatchGetNumWithSV - This interface is like `GetNum/BatchGetNum`, but add requirement about the key with versions ranging from the specified start version to the current version.

Reviewer 3: What is the current version?

>   - GetWithTTL/BatchGetWithTTL - Gets the unexpired values within the TTL.

Reviewer 3: This seems unnecessary given `GetNumWithSV/BatchGetNumWithSV `, is there a difference?

Author: `GetWithTTL` is similar with `GetNumWithSV`，but `GetWithTTL` is related with ttl, while `GetNumWithSV` is related with start version.

Reviewer 3: I mean that given that the client should supply the current time, then a TTL limit can be easily computed from the start time and vice versa. (I'm assuming this is using a supplied TTL, not the TTL of the data, which I would expect to be taken into account in any case)

  - Scan - Scans the values of all keys of the latest version within a range

>   - ScanNum -  Scans the number of all keys within a range to get the corresponding values of a specified number of versions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - ScanNum - Scans the number of all keys within a range to get the corresponding values of a specified number of versions
```

  - ScanNumWithSV - Scans all the keys within a range and gets the corresponding values ranging from the specified start version to the current version 

>   - Put/BatchPut -  Increases the new version value of a key, where version is the current timestamp by default

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Put/BatchPut - Increases the new version value of a key, where version is the current timestamp by default
```

>   - Delete/BatchDelete - Deletes all versions of a specified key (`key:cur_ts -> delete`)

Reviewer 3: To clarify, this just adds a tombstone version, it does not remove any data from the DB? So using Get with an earlier timestamp will still return some data?

Author: yes, `Delelte` use rocksdb's delete interface, so it is not remove any data internally. Use Get  would not return those data.

  - DeleteRange - Deletes all versions of key in a range using rocksdb DeleteRange

The above fetch operations(get/scan) can use `rocksdb prefix_extractor` to improve the performance of iterator seek. `key: ts-> delete` indicates that all data before the `ts` has been deleted.

### Version recycling

> 

Reviewer 3: How does TiKV know to run version recycling for a CF? Is it specified in the config?

Author: now, the cf is the fixed one "vercf".

  - using multi-version Garbage Collection (GC) similar to TxnKV, and periodically starting the gc worker in the background to delete redundant versions of data;
  - using compaction filter via rocksdb compaction to delete redundant versions. 

The GC method consumes CPU or storage resources, but the version recycling is accurate and efficient; The compaction filter method does not take up CPU or storage resources. However, compaction only has a local applicable scope, so multi-version recycling efficiency is low.

This proposal adopts a combination of the above two methods, with compaction as the major mechanism and GC as the supplement. The default maximum number of versions is 1, which can default to the compaction filter recycling version, so recycling efficiency is moderate. If the maximum number of versions is more than 1 or more efficient version recycling is required, you can dynamically configure GC to enable it.

The compaction filter is customized based on the maximum number of versions, `MaxVerNum`, and delete tombstone based on key instead of key: `ts`. So only one `MaxVerNum` can be set for one `cf`.

### Data increment

> The `ScanNumWithSV` rpc interface is used to get all data increments  of the entire cluster or within a specified range [start_ts, cur_ts). When this interface is called, the snapshot of  the entire cluster or the current cur_ts is obtained before scanning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `ScanNumWithSV` rpc interface is used to get all data increments of the entire cluster or within a specified range [start_ts, cur_ts). When this interface is called, the snapshot of the entire cluster or the current cur_ts is obtained before scanning.
```

VerKV integrated to tidb/br and tidb/ticdc can better facilitate the implementation of full/incremental backup and CDC services.  

### Data replication

> - A-> B - asynchronous one-way replication; Cluster B accesses the CDC service of cluster A to pull or push incremental data of each period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A -> B - asynchronous one-way replication; Cluster B accesses the CDC service of cluster A to pull or push incremental data of each period.
```

> - A-> B - asynchronous one-way replication; Cluster B accesses the CDC service of cluster A to pull or push incremental data of each period.

Reviewer 3: Are these proposed API functions or new tools or something else?

Author: new function would be integrated with `br` and `cdc`.

- A <-> B -  asynchronous two-way replication, which is equivalent to two one-way replication processes. Write conflicts can be resolved according to ts.

### Others

Rocksdb User Timestamp（WIP）can also be considered to improve the engine efficiency. 

## Drawbacks

This VerKV adds version information, so it would decrease the performance of data fetch interface. And the data version recycling would also add pressure to  system.

> 

Reviewer 3: It seems to me the primary drawback is the maintenance burden this is likely to add. It adds a lot of API surface, a new encoding scheme, and a new kind of GC. It seems that the latter two could interact with other new or existing features, so the added complexity will potentially affect any work, not just work on VerKV.

It does sound nice to have better support for HBase though! I would like to see some analysis of the cost/benefit trade-off for this RFC.

Reviewer 3: Furthermore it seems to shift some responsibility around timestamps to TiKV, which will also increase complexity.

Author: For now, VerKV would be used singly, and not affect the work of rawkv and txnkv. The maintenance burden may be high or low. I would have not better cost/benefit trade-off now. And maybe leave it later when implement it.

  the key with versions ranging from the specified start version to the current version.
  - GetWithTTL/BatchGetWithTTL - Gets the unexpired values within the TTL.
  - Scan - Scans the values of all keys of the latest version within a range
  - ScanNum - Scans the number of all keys within a range to get the corresponding values of a specified
  number of versions
  - ScanNumWithSV - Scans all the keys within a range and gets the corresponding values ranging from
  the specified start version to the current version
  - Put/BatchPut - Increases the new version value of a key, where version is the current timestamp by default
  - Delete/BatchDelete - Deletes all versions of a specified key (`key:cur_ts -> delete`)
  - DeleteRange - Deletes all versions of key in a range using rocksdb DeleteRange

The above fetch operations(get/scan) can use `rocksdb prefix_extractor` to improve the performance of iterator seek.
`key: ts-> delete` indicates that all data before the `ts` has been deleted.

### Version recycling

The design of the version recycling will affect cluster performance and the functional designs of

> incremental backup and CDC. There are two major approaches:

Reviewer: Agree version recycling affect backup and CDC, could you specify under what condition data need to be recycled?

Author: I have add some content about version recycling condtion.

  and cross-IDC cluster synchronization application scenarios include:

  - Online data replication between TiKV clusters, which includes a full
    migrations followed by incremental migrations;
  - Cluster data backup, which includes a first full backup followed perform
    an incremental data backups every other time;
  - CDC service created based on incremental data acquisition; can reliably
    provide incremental data services;
  - In cross data center cluster synchronization scenarios, VerKV can not
    only process incremental data synchronization, but also handle write
    conflicts caused by the same key.

- Support multi-versioned data. The corresponding application scenarios
  include:

  - Data version retrieval. For certain businesses, multiple versions of
    historical data must be maintained for for backtracking and analysis.
    Reliance on third-party storage and consumption of computing resources
    (user dynamic characteristics, User behavior link tracking) needs to be
    reduced, and the data processing process optimized;
  - Data version control, for fast data recovery after problematic data
    writes in businesses.

> - Support data expiration based on TTL. The corresponding application

Reviewer 4: Can you be more specific on how to support TTL?

Author: With `getWithTTL` interface, it would only return data which's timestamp is bigger than `timestampNow - TTL`

  scenarios include:

  - Setting expiration time to obtain data of a recent period
  - Setting expiration time to clear inactive data for a specified amount
    of time

### Compatibility

> The design adds a new Column Family called `VerCF` in RocksDB, which avoids

Reviewer 4: maybe we can support multiple CF, by prefix all such CF with `VerCF_` prefix? Similarly we can prefix RawKV CFs with `RawCF_` prefix, then we can support mixed use of all these incompatible APIs.

Author: multple CF is not supported temporarily, but will reserve a field of cf for implementing multiple CF later.

potential compatibility issues with the existing RawKV annd TxnKV data and
processing logics, and could be created dynamically when needed.
This design allows maximum reuse of the current implementations of TiKV and PD.

### Data model and interface

VerKV is a kv-like interface similar to the RawKV interface. It hides version
information from upper-layer services. Its data model is multi-versioned KV
between RawKV and TxnKV.

#### Data model and Consistency

The data model is like `key:version -> value`. The version uses the global `ts`

> obtained from the PD TSO by default . Then strong consistency (single key level

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
obtained from the PD TSO by default. Then strong consistency (single key level
```

Author: have fixed it. @Connor1996

 linearizability) would be support. And the implementation is subject to

>  further change if we use the user TS feature of RocksDB.

Reviewer 4: Don't worry about user TS of rocksdb - the key format is compatible.

  version
- Put/BatchPut - Increases the new version value of a key, where version is
  the current timestamp by default
- Delete/BatchDelete - Deletes all versions of a specified key
  (`key:cur_ts -> delete`)
- DeleteRange - Deletes all versions of key in a range using rocksdb DeleteRange

The above fetch operations(get/scan) can use `rocksdb prefix_extractor` to
improve the performance of iterator seek. `key: ts-> delete` indicates that
 all data before the `ts` has been deleted.

### Version recycling

The version recycling would recycling the redundant versions more than
`MaxVerNum`, e.g. one key has five versions [v1 v2 v3 v4 v5], and the
`MaxVerNum` is set to be 3, then [v1 v2] would be recycled.

The design of the version recycling will affect cluster performance and the
functional designs of incremental backup and CDC. There are two major
approaches:

- using multi-version Garbage Collection (GC) similar to TxnKV, and
  periodically starting the gc worker in the background to delete redundant
  versions of data;
- using compaction filter via rocksdb compaction to delete redundant versions.
  The default maximum number of versions is 1, which can default to the

>   compaction filter recycling version , so recycling efficiency is moderate.

Reviewer 4: As we are adding compaction filter GC for TxnKV, these two items boil down to compatibility with TxnKV GC.

#### RPC Interface

With reference to the proto interface, the following interfaces are defined as
a new service other than tikv:

- Get/BatchGet - Gets the values for latest version of the key by default
- GetNum/BatchGetNum - Get the values for a specified number of versions of a
  key. `version_num` must be less than or equal to `MaxVerNum`.
- GetNumWithSV/BatchGetNumWithSV - This interface is like `GetNum/BatchGetNum`,
  but add requirement about the key with versions ranging from the specified
  start version to the current version.
- GetWithTTL/BatchGetWithTTL - Gets the unexpired values within the TTL.
- Scan - Scans the values of all keys of the latest version within a range
- ScanNum - Scans the number of all keys within a range to get the
  corresponding values of a specified number of versions
- ScanNumWithSV - Scans all the keys within a range and gets the
  corresponding values ranging from the specified start version to the current
  version
- Put/BatchPut - Increases the new version value of a key, where version is
  the current timestamp by default
- Delete/BatchDelete - Deletes all versions of a specified key
  (`key:cur_ts -> delete`)

> - DeleteRange - Deletes all versions of key in a range using rocksdb DeleteRange

Reviewer 3: Could we start with a more minimal API and then add some of these later once we have some experience with the API? One way to do that is to prioritize the commands, and we'd implement the p1 commands, then wait a bit, then the p2 commands, etc.

Some orthogonal questions:
* could the four `get` commands be combined by having a max num, min version, and TTL arguments? Likewise with Scan.
* I still think that the GetWithTTL command is not needed: e.g., if the current ts is 1000 and the client wants GetWithTTL with a TTL of 100, then the client could call GetNumWithSV with ts = 900 (and num is some large number).
* The description of `Put` is confusing to me. Do you mean "adds a new value for a key with a given timestamp"? (As mentioned elsewhere, I don't think TiKV should know the current time).

Author: Ok, I would modify about `get` and remove `GetWithTTL`. for `Put`, the timestamp is obtained from the PD TSO when the client sdk is doing the request .

The above fetch operations(get/scan) can use `rocksdb prefix_extractor` to
improve the performance of iterator seek. `key: ts-> delete` indicates that

>  all data before the `ts` has been deleted.

Reviewer 3: How is `delete` represented in the store?

Author: the `delete` is represented same with rocksdb's implementation.

interface is called, the snapshot of the entire cluster or the current cur_ts
is obtained before scanning.

VerKV integrated to tidb/br and tidb/ticdc can better facilitate the
implementation of full/incremental backup and CDC services.

### Data replication

For data replication, there are two main situations:

- A -> B: asynchronous one-way replication, Cluster B accesses the CDC
  service of cluster A to pull or push incremental data of each period
- A <-> B: asynchronous two-way replication, which is equivalent to two
  one-way replication processes. Write conflicts can be resolved according to ts

### Others

Rocksdb User Timestamp（WIP）can also be considered to improve the engine
efficiency.

## Drawbacks

As compared with RawKV, this VerKV adds version information, so it would
 decrease the performance of data fetch interface and the version recycling
would add pressure to system.

And for VerKV is going to replace RawKV, it could not be updated directly
 from RawKV to VerKV, and have to migrated date to a new cluster with VerKV
using some method.

Meanwhile, add a new API would add maintenance burden during a period of time

>  before deprecating RawKV in the future.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Compared with RawKV, this VerKV adds version information, so it would
 decrease the performance of data fetch interface and the version recycling
would add pressure to the system.

Migration from RawKV to VerKV cannot be one directly.  The data has to be  
migrated to a new cluster with VerKV using some extra methods.

Meanwhile, introducing a new API would add maintenance burden for a period of time
before RawKV is deprecated in the future.
```

    Reliance on third-party storage and consumption of computing resources
    (user dynamic characteristics, User behavior link tracking) needs to be
    reduced, and the data processing process optimized;
  - Data version control, for fast data recovery after problematic data
    writes in businesses.

- Support data expiration based on TTL. The corresponding application
  scenarios include:

  - Setting expiration time to obtain data of a recent period
  - Setting expiration time to clear inactive data for a specified amount
    of time

### Compatibility

The design adds a new Column Family called `VerCF` in RocksDB, which avoids
potential compatibility issues with the existing RawKV annd TxnKV data and
processing logics, and could be created dynamically when needed.
This design allows maximum reuse of the current implementations of TiKV and PD.

### Data model and interface

VerKV is a kv-like interface similar to the RawKV interface. It hides version
information from upper-layer services. Its data model is multi-versioned KV
between RawKV and TxnKV.

#### Data model and Consistency

The data model is like `key:version -> value`. The version uses the current

> timestamp by default, or can be specified by the user (such as the global `ts`

Reviewer 3: In either case, I would prefer the client to supply the timestamp. If TiKV knows the current time, that is adding a chunk of new functionality/complexity. In fact, it would be really nice if timestamps could remain opaque to TiKV as far as possible (which I think means we can't support the TTL expiry functionality in TiKV).

Reviewer 6: I would prefer client giving timestamp as well.

### Data increment

The `ScanNumWithSV` rpc interface is used to get all data increments  of the entire cluster or within a specified range [start_ts, cur_ts). When this interface is called, the snapshot of  the entire cluster or the current cur_ts is obtained before scanning.

VerKV integrated to tidb/br and tidb/ticdc can better facilitate the implementation of full/incremental backup and CDC services.  

### Data replication

- A-> B - asynchronous one-way replication; Cluster B accesses the CDC service of cluster A to pull or push incremental data of each period.
- A <-> B -  asynchronous two-way replication, which is equivalent to two one-way replication processes. Write conflicts can be resolved according to ts.

### Others

Rocksdb User Timestamp（WIP）can also be considered to improve the engine efficiency. 

## Drawbacks

This VerKV adds version information, so it would decrease the performance of data fetch interface. And the data version recycling would also add pressure to  system.

## Appendix

> ### Proto3 definition

Reviewer 7: I suggest to remove the definitions. They are subject to change and becomes misleading/useless in the end.

Author: done

    - Data version control, for fast data recovery after problematic data writes in businesses.

  - Support data expiration based on TTL. The corresponding application scenarios include:
    - Setting expiration time to obtain data of a recent period
    - Setting expiration time to clear inactive data for a specified amount of time

### Compatibility

The design adds a VerKV Column Family in RocksDB, which avoids poential compatibility issues with the existing RawKV annd TxnKV data and processing logics, and could be created dynamically when needed. This design allows maximum reuse of the current implementations of TiKV and PD.

### Data model and interface

VerKV is a kv-like interface similar to the RawKV interface. It hides version information from upper-layer services. Its data model is multi-versioned KV between RawKV and TxnKV. 

#### Data model

> The data model is `key:version -> value`. The version uses the current timestamp by default, or can be specified by the user (such as the global `ts` obtained from the PD TSO).

Reviewer 7: The data schema is better leave to undecided. So that we may utilize user TS support from rocksdb directly.

Author: For rocksdb user TS now is not stable, the first edition would not use this feature. The data model would be ok now. Here, I would add some comments about other possibilities.

  - Scan - Scans the values of all keys of the latest version within a range
  - ScanNum -  Scans the number of all keys within a range to get the corresponding values of a specified number of versions
  - ScanNumWithSV - Scans all the keys within a range and gets the corresponding values ranging from the specified start version to the current version 
  - Put/BatchPut -  Increases the new version value of a key, where version is the current timestamp by default
  - Delete/BatchDelete - Deletes all versions of a specified key (`key:cur_ts -> delete`)
  - DeleteRange - Deletes all versions of key in a range using rocksdb DeleteRange

The above fetch operations(get/scan) can use `rocksdb prefix_extractor` to improve the performance of iterator seek. `key: ts-> delete` indicates that all data before the `ts` has been deleted.

### Version recycling

The design of the version recycling will affect cluster performance and the functional designs of incremental backup and CDC. There are two major approaches: 
  - using multi-version Garbage Collection (GC) similar to TxnKV, and periodically starting the gc worker in the background to delete redundant versions of data;

>   - using compaction filter via rocksdb compaction to delete redundant versions.

Reviewer 8: I prefer this way.

Author: If compaction filter would have a good gc effect, it is better way.

### Data increment

The `ScanNumWithSV` rpc interface is used to get all data increments  of the entire cluster or within a specified range [start_ts, cur_ts). When this interface is called, the snapshot of  the entire cluster or the current cur_ts is obtained before scanning.

VerKV integrated to tidb/br and tidb/ticdc can better facilitate the implementation of full/incremental backup and CDC services.  

### Data replication

- A-> B - asynchronous one-way replication; Cluster B accesses the CDC service of cluster A to pull or push incremental data of each period.
- A <-> B -  asynchronous two-way replication, which is equivalent to two one-way replication processes. Write conflicts can be resolved according to ts.

### Others

Rocksdb User Timestamp（WIP）can also be considered to improve the engine efficiency. 

## Drawbacks

This VerKV adds version information, so it would decrease the performance of data fetch interface. And the data version recycling would also add pressure to  system.

## Appendix

### Proto3 definition

```
// used to transport a value and the version as a result for get methods.
// here T stands for Timestamp.

> struct TValue {

Reviewer 8: I prefer VerValue

Author: OK

#### Data model

> The data model is like `key:version -> value`. The version uses the current timestamp by default, or can be specified by the user (such as the global `ts` obtained from the PD TSO). And the implementation would be changed when consider to use rocksdb user TS feature.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The data model is like `key:version -> value`. The version uses the current timestamp by default, or can be specified by the user (such as the global `ts` obtained from the PD TSO). And the implementation is subject to further change if we use the user TS feature of RocksDB.
```

information from upper-layer services. Its data model is multi-versioned KV
between RawKV and TxnKV.

#### Data model and Consistency

The data model is like `key:version -> value`. The version uses the current
timestamp by default, or can be specified by the user (such as the global `ts`
obtained from the PD TSO). And the implementation is subject to further change
if we use the user TS feature of RocksDB.

> For consistency, strong and weak consistency would be support. This is

Reviewer: Much better! could you specify what strong consistency you refer to? Single key level linearizability or snapshot isolation?

Author: single key level linearlizability

Reviewer: Thank you for the clarification!

### Version recycling

The version recycling would recycling the redundant versions more than

> `MaxVerNum`, e.g. one key has five versions [v1 v2 v3 v4 v3], and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`MaxVerNum`, e.g. one key has five versions [v1 v2 v3 v4 v5], and the
```

v5?

> `MaxVerNum` is set to be 3, then [v1 v2] would be recycled.

Reviewer: Feels like incremental backup will always lose some data if a key is updated very frequently no matter which consistency we choose. Is it okay for your case?

Author: it is okay for my case
